priv/reference.md, before:

# Pantagruel Language Reference

A Pantagruel document consists of a series of definitions and assertions about
*domains* and *procedures*. The Pantagruel language is parseable by the
Pantagruel document checker, which will evaluate the document and check it for
errors. 

Evaluation of a Pantagruel document is not the same as evaluation of a computer
program; there is no execution phase where variables are substituted by real
values. Therefore, all analysis is static.

## Pantagruel Syntax

A Pantagruel **program** consists of a series of **chapters**. Each chapter
consists of a **head** and an optional **body**.

At the top of the program are optional **directives**. Currently, there are two
recognized directives: 

- `module`
- `import`

### Module statements

The first line of a Pantagruel program is, optionally, a module directive. It looks like this:

```pantagruel
module NUMBERS.
```

This will make the subsequent program available for import under the module
name `NUMBERS`.

### Import statements

Import directives are used to introduce bindings defined by another module (see
`module`, above) into the evaluation environment for the current document.

### Chapter heads

A Pantagruel chapter head introduces one or more symbols, of two kinds:
**procedures** and **domains**. A procedure might be a computer program, or a
function. Most Pantagruel programs will introduce at least one procedure, which
is the program, business logic, or operation they're specifying.

A domain is some set of values which variables will be taken from. For
instance, the natural numbers make up a domain, as do the real numbers. But so
could the values `{"ok", "error"}` or some business logic-specific concept like
`User` or `Post`. In this way domains are like types, though more flexible.

There are two expression forms possible in a chapter head:

#### Procedure declaration

Here is an example procedure declaration:

```pantagruel
fib n:Nat => Nat.
```

It introduces a procedure called `fib`, which takes one argument, `n`
in the domain `Nat`. The `=>` indicates that this procedure **yields**
a value in some domain, which in this case is also `Nat`.

##### Procedure declaration forms

Procedures can be declared with or without arguments, return domains,
and predicates. Here's a declaration of a procedure with no arguments
and an undefined return:

```pantagruel
f.
```

Procedure arguments are specified by a comma-separated list of argument
**bindings**, separated by a colon. The comma-separated list may also contain
other arbitrary **predicates**, representing some constraint on the procedure
domain.

Here's a procedure declaration with a predicate:

```pantagruel
f x:Nat, x > 5.
```

The second element in the list indicates that `f` is defined for any
natural number `x` greater than 5.

```pantagruel
f x:Nat, x > 5, x < 10.
```

This declares a procedure `f` that's defined for any natural number `x`
greater than 5 and less than 10.

This list of colon-separated bindings with optional predicates is a **binding
sequence** and will show up elsewhere in the language.

Any procedure can also yield some domain, as above.

##### Procedures with side effects

A procedure which has no `=>` doesn't yield any value. Thus, the type of the
application of such a procedure is `Void`. However, such procedures are still
quite useful as they might have some **side effects**, describing a change in
the world. 

When a procedure is declared that yields no values, we can refer to its
arguments *before* and *after* the procedure. For instance, in the case of `f`
above, we can refer to two symbols: `x` and `x'` (note the `'`), to describe
`x` *before* the application of `f` and *after*.

#### Domain alias

The other type of statement available in a chapter head is a **domain alias**.
This is a simple statement of equivalence between a new domain and some
existing one. It uses the **equals** symbol `=`.

Here's an example domain alias:

```pantagruel
Status = {"ok", "error"}.
```

Introduces a domain `Status` which is equivalent to the set of values
`ok` and `error`.

Here's an example chapter head:

```pantagruel
Score = Nat.
halve score: Score, score mod 2 = 0 => Score.
```

It introduces a procedure, `halve`, which operates on all even
`Score`s. It also clarifies that `Score` in this case is just an alias
for `Nat`.

### Chapter Bodies

Chapter **bodies** are separated from chapter heads with a horizontal
line, consisting of three hyphens:

```pantagruel
f.
---
f x = 1.
```

Chapter bodies consist of one or more **statements**. Each statement expresses
some **proposition** about a procedure or domain and is terminated by a period.

A top-level statement can be made of any valid **expression**. The statement is
not executed or semantically evaluated; ultimately it's intended to communicate
something to a human reader.

### Expressions

#### Values

The most basic expressions are bare values, ie, any expression which
evaluates to itself.

##### Integers

Integer values are represented as normal numbers: `1`, `1000`. Pantagruel will
attempt to type a literal number as narrowly as possible. See 'Type Hierarchy'
below for the full list of built-in number types.

##### Real numbers

Real numbers are written with a decimal point: `2.47`, `10.0`.

##### Strings

Literal text values are represented with quotation marks: `"ok"`, `"error"`.

##### Operators

There is a closed set of symbols that are recognized as **operators**,
that are applied infix instead of prefix, eg: `1 + 1`. `x in Y`.

###### Binary operators

Binary operators take two arguments.

- `+`
- `-`
- `*`
- `/`
- `^`
- `mod`
- `|`
- `&`
- `->`
- `<->`
- `=`
- `>`
- `<`
- `=<`
- `>=`
- `!=`
- `and`
- `or`
- `xor`
- `in`

###### Unary operators

Unary operators take one argument.

- `#`
- `~`

###### Sum and product types

`+` and `*` can be applied to domains as well as values. 

`+` produces a sum type; for instance, `String + Nat + Bool` denotes the domain
consisting of all strings, natural numbers, and boolean values. 

`*` produces a product type; for instance, `String * Nat` denotes the domain of
all *pairs* of strings and natural numbers.

##### Symbols

Symbols are identifiers to which values are bound, as in function
declarations. They can contain any alphanumeric character that is not
an operator.

#### Procedure application

Application of `f` to `x` is represented by the syntax `f x`.

Procedure application can be performed on any number of arguments, eg.: `f x y
z`. 

#### Quantification

`all` and `some` Represent the logical quantifications "for all..." and "there
is some...", respectively. They have the form of a **quantifier**, followed by
a comma-separated list of **binding** or **expression** forms, followed by a
**yields** sign, followed by a statement about the bound variables.

```pantagruel
all x: Nat, y: Nat, x > y => (x - y) > 0.
```

This example says that for any x and y in the natural numbers where x is
greater than y, x minus y is greater than 0. It could also be written in a
slightly more compressed form, binding multiple variables from the same domain:

```pantagruel
all (x, y): Nat, x > y => (x - y) > 0.
```

#### Containers

There are three **containers** in Pantagruel. Containers are represented by
surrounding an expression or comma-separated list of expressions by a pair of
delimiters which reflects the type of container being represented.

- parens: `()`
- set: `{}`
- sequence: `[]`

##### Parentheses

Any expression can be wrapped in parentheses to bind more tightly. For
instance, whereas `f x y z a` denotes the application of `f` to the four
arguments `x`, `y`, `z`, and `a`, `f x (y z a)` denotes the application of `f`
to two arguments: `x` and the result of the application of `y` to `z` and `a`.

##### Sets and sequences

Sets and sequences represent groups of values or domains. 

The notation `{1, 2, 3}` represents the unordered set of the natural numbers 1,
2, 3. The notation `[1, 2, 3]` represents the ordering of those same values in
that order.

Set and sequence notation, when applied to domains, denotes a "set of" or
"sequence of" domain. For instance, `[String]` is the domain of sequences of
strings.

**sequence comprehensions** may be formed by wrapping a quantification in
square brackets. For instance, 

```pantagruel
[all x : X => x ^ 2].
```

denotes a sequence made up every element in the domain X, squared.

#### Cases

A case expression consists of the symbol `case`, an optional expression, and a
series of **mappings** of expressions to expressions. Each mapping is separated
by a comma, and the left side is mapped to the right side with a `=>`. 

For instance:

```
fib x = case ...
    x > 2 => fib (x - 1) + fib (x - 2),
    x = 1 => 1,
    x = 2 => 1.
```

If there's an expression between `case` and `...`, it will be type-checked
against the left-hand sides of the mapping clauses.

#### Update

An update expression consists of the symbol `update`, an expression, and
mapping clauses.

For instance:

```
fib' = update fib ...
    5 => 100.
```

Represents a procedure which behaves exactly like `fib`, except when it is
called on `5`.

## Binding

The Pantagruel interpreter evaluates a program for the purpose of
enforcing Pantagruel's **binding** rules. To sum them up, they are:

1. Any symbol referred to in a chapter head must be bound by the end of
that head.
2. Any symbol referred to in a chapter body must be bound by the end of
the *next* body.

This structure is crucial in establishing the Pantagruel style of
specification, where new terms are introduced so as to provide refinement
for known terms, eg:

```pantagruel
pred n:Nat.
---
pred n = is_even? n and n > 5.

;

is_even? n:Nat => Bool.
---
is_even? 0.
~(is_even? 1).
is_even? n = is_even? (n - 2).
```

That specification describes the behavior of a predicate as checking
`is_even?` and `> 5`. It then goes on in the next chapter to fill in
what `is_even?` involves. This allows it to be defined in context; if
a symbol had to be defined before it was used, as is often the case in
programming languages, the narrative thread of increasing detail would
be lost and specifications would be all preamble.

### Binding Forms

Symbols are bound into the program environment in one of two ways: either
they're built into the language, or they're introduced with one of a
few specific forms.

#### Procedure declarations

When a procedure is declared, the name of the procedure is bound into the
environment, as are the names of the variables the procedure takes.

```
f x:Y, x > z => a
* *
```

#### Domain aliases

When a domain alias is introduced, the name of the alias is bound into the
environment.
```
D = X
*
```

In the case of these chapter head statements, all other symbol positions
must be bound by the end of the subchapter.

#### Quantifications

Expressions within quantifications have similar binding behavior as procedures.

```
all x: Y, x > z => f x
    *
```

#### Binding Operators

There are two operators for binding symbols into the environment:

##### Binding in a Domain

A symbol can be bound with `:` to give it the type of the domain on the right
of the operator:

```
all x: Nat => x.
```

`x` is of the type `Nat`.

##### Binding a Member of an Expression

A symbol bound with `<:` will have the *member type* of the expression on the right side of the operator:

```
all x <: items y => x.
```

If `items y` has a type of `{T}` or `[T]`, then `x` will have the type `T`.

## Types

Every expression in a Pantagruel document has a type. The type of an expression
is the domain to which the values it produces belong.

### Static forms

#### Sets and sequences

The type of any expression `[e]` is `sequence of (type of e)`, and the type of
`{e}` is `set of (type of e)`.

The type of `{v1, v2, v3}` is the sum of the types of values `v1, v2, v3`.

Similarly, the type of `D1 + D2` is the sum of the domains `D1` and `D2`.

#### Declarations

The type of a procedure declaration is a procedure type, typed by all the
arguments and the codomain of the function (the part to the right of the `=>`).

If a procedure has no `=>`, its codomain is `Void`.

For bare declarations, with no arguments or `=>`: 

If the symbol begins with a lower-case letter, it will be typed as a 0-argument
`Void` function.

If it begins with an upper case letter, it will be typed as a domain.

### Expressions

#### Singletons

If a procedure is declared with some codomain and no arguments, then a
reference to that procedure is typed as its codomain. This lets us denote
singleton values as procedures. For instance:

```
User.
nobody => User.
---
nobody.
```

The type of `nobody` in this chapter body is `User`.

#### Application

##### Procedure application

The type of the application of a procedure to its arguments is the codomain of
that procedure.

##### Sequence application

The application of a sequence to a value of the type contained by the sequence
is typed as getting the index of that value. For instance:

```
User.
users => [User].
admin => User.
---
users admin.
```

This is interpreted as getting the index of `admin` within `users` and so is
typed as `Nat0`.

The application of a sequence to some integer is typed as indexing within that
sequence. For instance:

```
User.
users => [User].
---
users 0.
```

This is interpreted as getting the 0th element of `users`.

The above applies to strings as well, where the element domain can be either
`String` or `Char`.

#### Booleans

The type of a boolean operation is `Bool`. Boolean arguments are checked for
unification (see below).

#### Comparisons

The type of a comparison operation is `Bool`. Comparison arguments are checked
for unification (see below).

#### `in`

The type of the `in` operator is `Bool`. The righthand operand must be either a
set or sequence (including strings), and the lefthand operator must be
unifiable (see below) with the inner type of the right.

#### `#`

The type of the `#` unary operator is `Nat0`. The operand must be either a set
or sequence.

#### Other Binary Operators

The type of an arithmetic binary operation is the unification of the two sides
(see below).

#### Cases

The type of a case expression is the unification of the types of all its
expressions all its branches (see below).

If there is expression between `case` and `...`, then the document checker will
additionally check that that expression's type can be unified with the types of
the patterns of all its branches.

### Type Unification

Pantagruel has a type system that is somewhat more lenient than those found in
ordinary programming languages. Simply put, the *unification* of any two types
is the **nearest common ancestor** they share in their type hierarchies.

For instance:

The unification of `Nat` and `Nat` is `Nat`.

The unification of `Nat` and `Nat0` is `Nat0`; `Nat0` contains all the values
in `Nat0`. 

The unification of `Bool` and `Char` is `Nat0`. See the full type hierarchy
diagram below.

The domain `Any` contains all other types. Therefore:

The unification of `Bool` and `Any` is `Any`.

The unification of some user-declared domain `Foo` and `Any` is `Any`.

However: non-Any types which only share `Any` as an ancestor type are *not*
unifiable. Thus:

There is no unification of `Real` and `String`.

There is no unification of some user-declared domain `Foo` and `Nat`.

It's important to note that these rules allow operations which would be
disallowed in standard programming language type systems. For instance,

```
inc: Nat => Nat.
---
inc 0.
```

is a valid Pantagruel document. While 0 is not a member of the set of natural
numbers, it is unifiable with them. On the other hand, 

```
inc: Nat => Nat.
---
inc "ok".
```

produces a type error: the only shared ancestor between `String` and `Nat` is
`Any`. 

These rules have been chosen to produce the greatest number of helpful type
errors while making sure to err on the side of unintrusiveness. The purpose of
the Pantagruel type system is not to prevent illegal runtime operations; thus,
we don't want document authors to ever feel that they are "fighting the type
system" in order to express themselves.

### Type Hierarchy

The following domains are included in the base environment.

```
     Any__________________
     | \      \      \    \
  Real  Domain String Date Void
     | 
   Rat
     | 
   Int
     |
  Nat0
  /  | 
Bool Nat 
     |
     Char
```

### Type Errors

To type-check a document, the Pantagruel checker attempts to determine the type
of each top-level statement in order. If any expression either:

- Can't be fully resolved due to a type unification failure anywhere inside the
  expression;
- Fails one of the special-case type checks noted above (eg., checking that
  the operand of `#` is a container type)

Then the checker will emit a type error and the document will fail the check.

Commit message:

Use ellipsis as clause introducer

priv/reference.md, after:

# Pantagruel Language Reference

A Pantagruel document consists of a series of definitions and assertions about
*domains* and *procedures*. The Pantagruel language is parseable by the
Pantagruel document checker, which will evaluate the document and check it for
errors. 

Evaluation of a Pantagruel document is not the same as evaluation of a computer
program; there is no execution phase where variables are substituted by real
values. Therefore, all analysis is static.

## Pantagruel Syntax

A Pantagruel **program** consists of a series of **chapters**. Each chapter
consists of a **head** and an optional **body**.

At the top of the program are optional **directives**. Currently, there are two
recognized directives: 

- `module`
- `import`

### Module statements

The first line of a Pantagruel program is, optionally, a module directive. It looks like this:

```pantagruel
module NUMBERS.
```

This will make the subsequent program available for import under the module
name `NUMBERS`.

### Import statements

Import directives are used to introduce bindings defined by another module (see
`module`, above) into the evaluation environment for the current document.

### Chapter heads

A Pantagruel chapter head introduces one or more symbols, of two kinds:
**procedures** and **domains**. A procedure might be a computer program, or a
function. Most Pantagruel programs will introduce at least one procedure, which
is the program, business logic, or operation they're specifying.

A domain is some set of values which variables will be taken from. For
instance, the natural numbers make up a domain, as do the real numbers. But so
could the values `{"ok", "error"}` or some business logic-specific concept like
`User` or `Post`. In this way domains are like types, though more flexible.

There are two expression forms possible in a chapter head:

#### Procedure declaration

Here is an example procedure declaration:

```pantagruel
fib n:Nat => Nat.
```

It introduces a procedure called `fib`, which takes one argument, `n`
in the domain `Nat`. The `=>` indicates that this procedure **yields**
a value in some domain, which in this case is also `Nat`.

##### Procedure declaration forms

Procedures can be declared with or without arguments, return domains,
and predicates. Here's a declaration of a procedure with no arguments
and an undefined return:

```pantagruel
f.
```

Procedure arguments are specified by a comma-separated list of argument
**bindings**, separated by a colon. The comma-separated list may also contain
other arbitrary **predicates**, representing some constraint on the procedure
domain.

Here's a procedure declaration with a predicate:

```pantagruel
f x:Nat, x > 5.
```

The second element in the list indicates that `f` is defined for any
natural number `x` greater than 5.

```pantagruel
f x:Nat, x > 5, x < 10.
```

This declares a procedure `f` that's defined for any natural number `x`
greater than 5 and less than 10.

This list of colon-separated bindings with optional predicates is a **binding
sequence** and will show up elsewhere in the language.

Any procedure can also yield some domain, as above.

##### Procedures with side effects

A procedure which has no `=>` doesn't yield any value. Thus, the type of the
application of such a procedure is `Void`. However, such procedures are still
quite useful as they might have some **side effects**, describing a change in
the world. 

When a procedure is declared that yields no values, we can refer to its
arguments *before* and *after* the procedure. For instance, in the case of `f`
above, we can refer to two symbols: `x` and `x'` (note the `'`), to describe
`x` *before* the application of `f` and *after*.

#### Domain alias

The other type of statement available in a chapter head is a **domain alias**.
This is a simple statement of equivalence between a new domain and some
existing one. It uses the **equals** symbol `=`.

Here's an example domain alias:

```pantagruel
Status = {"ok", "error"}.
```

Introduces a domain `Status` which is equivalent to the set of values
`ok` and `error`.

Here's an example chapter head:

```pantagruel
Score = Nat.
halve score: Score, score mod 2 = 0 => Score.
```

It introduces a procedure, `halve`, which operates on all even
`Score`s. It also clarifies that `Score` in this case is just an alias
for `Nat`.

### Chapter Bodies

Chapter **bodies** are separated from chapter heads with a horizontal
line, consisting of three hyphens:

```pantagruel
f.
---
f x = 1.
```

Chapter bodies consist of one or more **statements**. Each statement expresses
some **proposition** about a procedure or domain and is terminated by a period.

A top-level statement can be made of any valid **expression**. The statement is
not executed or semantically evaluated; ultimately it's intended to communicate
something to a human reader.

### Expressions

#### Values

The most basic expressions are bare values, ie, any expression which
evaluates to itself.

##### Integers

Integer values are represented as normal numbers: `1`, `1000`. Pantagruel will
attempt to type a literal number as narrowly as possible. See 'Type Hierarchy'
below for the full list of built-in number types.

##### Real numbers

Real numbers are written with a decimal point: `2.47`, `10.0`.

##### Strings

Literal text values are represented with quotation marks: `"ok"`, `"error"`.

##### Operators

There is a closed set of symbols that are recognized as **operators**,
that are applied infix instead of prefix, eg: `1 + 1`. `x in Y`.

###### Binary operators

Binary operators take two arguments.

- `+`
- `-`
- `*`
- `/`
- `^`
- `mod`
- `|`
- `&`
- `->`
- `<->`
- `=`
- `>`
- `<`
- `=<`
- `>=`
- `!=`
- `and`
- `or`
- `xor`
- `in`

###### Unary operators

Unary operators take one argument.

- `#`
- `~`

###### Sum and product types

`+` and `*` can be applied to domains as well as values. 

`+` produces a sum type; for instance, `String + Nat + Bool` denotes the domain
consisting of all strings, natural numbers, and boolean values. 

`*` produces a product type; for instance, `String * Nat` denotes the domain of
all *pairs* of strings and natural numbers.

##### Symbols

Symbols are identifiers to which values are bound, as in function
declarations. They can contain any alphanumeric character that is not
an operator.

#### Procedure application

Application of `f` to `x` is represented by the syntax `f x`.

Procedure application can be performed on any number of arguments, eg.: `f x y
z`. 

#### Quantification

`all` and `some` Represent the logical quantifications "for all..." and "there
is some...", respectively. They have the form of a **quantifier**, followed by
a comma-separated list of **binding** or **expression** forms, followed by a
**yields** sign, followed by a statement about the bound variables.

```pantagruel
all x: Nat, y: Nat, x > y ... (x - y) > 0.
```

This example says that for any x and y in the natural numbers where x is
greater than y, x minus y is greater than 0. It could also be written in a
slightly more compressed form, binding multiple variables from the same domain:

```pantagruel
all (x, y): Nat, x > y ... (x - y) > 0.
```

#### Containers

There are three **containers** in Pantagruel. Containers are represented by
surrounding an expression or comma-separated list of expressions by a pair of
delimiters which reflects the type of container being represented.

- parens: `()`
- set: `{}`
- sequence: `[]`

##### Parentheses

Any expression can be wrapped in parentheses to bind more tightly. For
instance, whereas `f x y z a` denotes the application of `f` to the four
arguments `x`, `y`, `z`, and `a`, `f x (y z a)` denotes the application of `f`
to two arguments: `x` and the result of the application of `y` to `z` and `a`.

##### Sets and sequences

Sets and sequences represent groups of values or domains. 

The notation `{1, 2, 3}` represents the unordered set of the natural numbers 1,
2, 3. The notation `[1, 2, 3]` represents the ordering of those same values in
that order.

Set and sequence notation, when applied to domains, denotes a "set of" or
"sequence of" domain. For instance, `[String]` is the domain of sequences of
strings.

**sequence comprehensions** may be formed by wrapping a quantification in
square brackets. For instance, 

```pantagruel
[all x : X ... x ^ 2].
```

denotes a sequence made up every element in the domain X, squared.

#### Case

A case expression consists of the symbol `case`, an optional expression, and a
series of **mappings** of expressions to expressions. Each mapping is separated
by a comma, and the left side is mapped to the right side with a `=>`. 

For instance:

```
fib x = case ...
    x > 2 => fib (x - 1) + fib (x - 2),
    x = 1 => 1,
    x = 2 => 1.
```

If there's no expression between `case` and `...`, then the left-hand side of
each mapping clause is typed as a statement that might be true or false. If
there's an expression between `case` and `...`, it will be type-checked against
the left-hand sides of the mapping clauses. For instance: 

```
fib x = case x ...
    1 => 1,
    2 => 1,
    x => fib (x - 1) + fib (x - 2).
```

#### Update

An update expression consists of the symbol `update`, an expression, and
mapping clauses.

For instance:

```
fib' = update fib ...
    5 => 100.
```

Represents a procedure which behaves exactly like `fib`, except when it is
called on `5`.

## Binding

The Pantagruel interpreter evaluates a program for the purpose of
enforcing Pantagruel's **binding** rules. To sum them up, they are:

1. Any symbol referred to in a chapter head must be bound by the end of
that head.
2. Any symbol referred to in a chapter body must be bound by the end of
the *next* body.

This structure is crucial in establishing the Pantagruel style of
specification, where new terms are introduced so as to provide refinement
for known terms, eg:

```pantagruel
pred n:Nat.
---
pred n = is_even? n and n > 5.

;

is_even? n:Nat => Bool.
---
is_even? 0.
~(is_even? 1).
is_even? n = is_even? (n - 2).
```

That specification describes the behavior of a predicate as checking
`is_even?` and `> 5`. It then goes on in the next chapter to fill in
what `is_even?` involves. This allows it to be defined in context; if
a symbol had to be defined before it was used, as is often the case in
programming languages, the narrative thread of increasing detail would
be lost and specifications would be all preamble.

### Binding Forms

Symbols are bound into the program environment in one of two ways: either
they're built into the language, or they're introduced with one of a
few specific forms.

#### Procedure declarations

When a procedure is declared, the name of the procedure is bound into the
environment, as are the names of the variables the procedure takes.

```
f x:Y, x > z => a
* *
```

#### Domain aliases

When a domain alias is introduced, the name of the alias is bound into the
environment.
```
D = X
*
```

In the case of these chapter head statements, all other symbol positions
must be bound by the end of the subchapter.

#### Quantifications

Expressions within quantifications have similar binding behavior as procedures.

```
all x: Y, x > z ... f x
    *
```

#### Binding Operators

There are two operators for binding symbols into the environment:

##### Binding in a Domain

A symbol can be bound with `:` to give it the type of the domain on the right
of the operator:

```
all x: Nat ... x.
```

`x` is of the type `Nat`.

##### Binding a Member of an Expression

A symbol bound with `<:` will have the *member type* of the expression on the right side of the operator:

```
all x <: items y ... x.
```

If `items y` has a type of `{T}` or `[T]`, then `x` will have the type `T`.

## Types

Every expression in a Pantagruel document has a type. The type of an expression
is the domain to which the values it produces belong.

### Static forms

#### Sets and sequences

The type of any expression `[e]` is `sequence of (type of e)`, and the type of
`{e}` is `set of (type of e)`.

The type of `{v1, v2, v3}` is the sum of the types of values `v1, v2, v3`.

Similarly, the type of `D1 + D2` is the sum of the domains `D1` and `D2`.

#### Declarations

The type of a procedure declaration is a procedure type, typed by all the
arguments and the codomain of the function (the part to the right of the `=>`).

If a procedure has no `=>`, its codomain is `Void`.

For bare declarations, with no arguments or `=>`: 

If the symbol begins with a lower-case letter, it will be typed as a 0-argument
`Void` function.

If it begins with an upper case letter, it will be typed as a domain.

### Expressions

#### Singletons

If a procedure is declared with some codomain and no arguments, then a
reference to that procedure is typed as its codomain. This lets us denote
singleton values as procedures. For instance:

```
User.
nobody => User.
---
nobody.
```

The type of `nobody` in this chapter body is `User`.

#### Application

##### Procedure application

The type of the application of a procedure to its arguments is the codomain of
that procedure.

##### Sequence application

The application of a sequence to a value of the type contained by the sequence
is typed as getting the index of that value. For instance:

```
User.
users => [User].
admin => User.
---
users admin.
```

This is interpreted as getting the index of `admin` within `users` and so is
typed as `Nat0`.

The application of a sequence to some integer is typed as indexing within that
sequence. For instance:

```
User.
users => [User].
---
users 0.
```

This is interpreted as getting the 0th element of `users`.

The above applies to strings as well, where the element domain can be either
`String` or `Char`.

#### Booleans

The type of a boolean operation is `Bool`. Boolean arguments are checked for
unification (see below).

#### Comparisons

The type of a comparison operation is `Bool`. Comparison arguments are checked
for unification (see below).

#### `in`

The type of the `in` operator is `Bool`. The righthand operand must be either a
set or sequence (including strings), and the lefthand operator must be
unifiable (see below) with the inner type of the right.

#### `#`

The type of the `#` unary operator is `Nat0`. The operand must be either a set
or sequence.

#### Other Binary Operators

The type of an arithmetic binary operation is the unification of the two sides
(see below).

#### Cases

The type of a case expression is the unification of the types of all its
expressions all its branches (see below).

If there is expression between `case` and `...`, then the document checker will
additionally check that that expression's type can be unified with the types of
the patterns of all its branches.

### Type Unification

Pantagruel has a type system that is somewhat more lenient than those found in
ordinary programming languages. Simply put, the *unification* of any two types
is the **nearest common ancestor** they share in their type hierarchies.

For instance:

The unification of `Nat` and `Nat` is `Nat`.

The unification of `Nat` and `Nat0` is `Nat0`; `Nat0` contains all the values
in `Nat0`. 

The unification of `Bool` and `Char` is `Nat0`. See the full type hierarchy
diagram below.

The domain `Any` contains all other types. Therefore:

The unification of `Bool` and `Any` is `Any`.

The unification of some user-declared domain `Foo` and `Any` is `Any`.

However: non-Any types which only share `Any` as an ancestor type are *not*
unifiable. Thus:

There is no unification of `Real` and `String`.

There is no unification of some user-declared domain `Foo` and `Nat`.

It's important to note that these rules allow operations which would be
disallowed in standard programming language type systems. For instance,

```
inc: Nat => Nat.
---
inc 0.
```

is a valid Pantagruel document. While 0 is not a member of the set of natural
numbers, it is unifiable with them. On the other hand, 

```
inc: Nat => Nat.
---
inc "ok".
```

produces a type error: the only shared ancestor between `String` and `Nat` is
`Any`. 

These rules have been chosen to produce the greatest number of helpful type
errors while making sure to err on the side of unintrusiveness. The purpose of
the Pantagruel type system is not to prevent illegal runtime operations; thus,
we don't want document authors to ever feel that they are "fighting the type
system" in order to express themselves.

### Type Hierarchy

The following domains are included in the base environment.

```
     Any__________________
     | \      \      \    \
  Real  Domain String Date Void
     | 
   Rat
     | 
   Int
     |
  Nat0
  /  | 
Bool Nat 
     |
     Char
```

### Type Errors

To type-check a document, the Pantagruel checker attempts to determine the type
of each top-level statement in order. If any expression either:

- Can't be fully resolved due to a type unification failure anywhere inside the
  expression;
- Fails one of the special-case type checks noted above (eg., checking that
  the operand of `#` is a container type)

Then the checker will emit a type error and the document will fail the check.
